>> Kyle: How many of you have heard
the term side effects before?
Okay, so what we're getting at, what we're
scratching at here is that in functional
programming for there to be a function
it's got to not have side effects.
But what does that really mean?
That word gets thrown around.
That term gets thrown around a lot.
What do we really mean by that?
Well, it's more than you realize.
Number one, if I were to write
a function called shippingRate,
a procedure called shippingRate.
Number one, right of the bat, you notice
it doesn't have any parameters listed.
And also you notice that it
doesn't have a return keyword.
It does, however,
still do a thing with some values.
It takes a size, a weight, and
a speed and it calculates a rate.
So on line five, six, seven, and eight, we
set up those inputs and output variable.
We call shippingRate on line nine and
on line ten,
we legitimately got a shippingRate.
This code will work all day long.
And this code actually is a lot like
most of the code in most of our apps.
It's using some other stuff around it and
it's affecting somewhere something else,
somewhere else in the program.
And it accomplished our end goal,
which is that it got us a shippingRate,
which is fine as it's not a function.
>> Kyle: And you would say, well, you just
told me on the previous slide that if
there is a semantic relationship between
inputs and outputs it's a function.
Well yes, that's part of it but
we have to keep evolving our definition.
And that is a necessary component but
it's not sufficient as a definition.
Because not only must there be
a relationship between the inputs and
the outputs, but the inputs and
the outputs, to take advantage of the math
that we're benefiting from with
functional programming, the inputs and
the outputs have to be direct.
If the inputs or the outputs or
both are indirect as they are here,
then it's not a true function, even
though there's a semantic relationship.
So when we say side effects,
what we really mean is indirect inputs or
indirect outputs, or both.
Some people like to call
indirect input side causes,
because it's like cause and effect.
Maybe that's useful.
I like to use the big
umbrella term side effects.
Side effects are both side causes,
side indirect inputs, and
potentially indirect outputs
affecting things outside of yourself.
You'll have to trust me and I can't
even really explain to the math, but
the math doesn't work if any of the inputs
or any of the outputs are indirect,
it just doesn't work.
So in a sense, we could twist the rubix
cube around and we could say, well,
its got to take direct inputs,
aka arguments past the parameters.
And it's got to compute and
return a value without assigning
to anything outside of itself.
It can't access anything
outside of itself and
it can't assign to anything
outside of itself.
That's a clear and solid way for us to
avoid the whole side effect of thing, and
that should make it a function.
Close, we're getting closer.
Those are necessary components,
but they're not sufficient.
This is side effects.
And we want to avoid side effects,
because side effects invalidate
the idea of functions.
We don't get functions and
therefore we don't get the benefits.
And by getting the benefits,
I don't mean that we can't use the API's.
We can definitely use the API's.
What we don't get as we
don't get the prove ability.
We don't get the verification,
the security of knowing that this thing is
definitely gonna do what we want it to do.
It's kind of a waste of time to go through
all the motions as if you're doing
functional programming and
not get the real benefit out of it.
And not only you don't get the benefit,
but
your readers don't get the benefit either.
>> Kyle: So that's why when we make
shippingRate and we pass in the inputs and
return an output.
We call shippingRate with some inputs and
we assigned in this case to the rate
variable, the output that's direct input
semantically related to direct output.
And that's a function.
>> Kyle: But I want you to notice
something that's interesting.
And by the way what I'm about to say,
I can only speak to JavaScript since
that's the context of our discussion.
I'm not saying anything about functional
programming in a general big sense.
But I am gonna tell you that in
JavaScript, this much I can say,
there's no such thing as a function,
there's such a thing as a function call.
That for us to have the definition of
a function isn't the important part.
The important part is that,
that function was called on line seven and
gave direct inputs and got a direct
input at that output at that call,
that's the important part.
It is the function call that matters.
It is the characteristics of
that function call that matter.
Are there direct inputs and
direct output from this function call?
That's the question.
Our temptation is to look at
the definition of the function to try to
answer that question.
But it turns out because of the nature
of how JavaScript works we cannot fully
answer the question, is it a function,
without looking at the function call.
So the important thing to talking
about a function and whether it is
behaving as a function or rather
behaving as a procedure, the important
characteristic there is not the definition
of the function but the call.
The call needs to avoid creating or
using side effects.
And it sort of indirect that the
definition of the function is that way.
Our temptation is to think about
the function being, but it's the call.
We wanna avoid those side
effects with the function calls
rather than with procedure calls, so we
use function calls to avoid side effects.
But that's only if possible, because not
all side effects will be avoidable and
that's what we wanna jump into.
So let's talk about side effects.
What really are the side effects
that we need to be concerned about?
We saw one kind of them which is
variables outside of the function, but
there's more to it than that.
It's more than just a variable.
For example, any sort of IO,
printing to the console, reading or
writing from the file system, any of
those IO kinds of things input, output.
Those are all side effects on the system.
So functional programming says avoid it,
those are out.
Database Storage, that's a side effect.
Functional programming says that's out.
Network calls, reading and
writing from the DOM,
timestamps generating the timestamp.
That's a side effect.
Generating a random number,
that's a side effect.
So all of a sudden we start to think, wow,
that's a lot of things in our
program that are side effects.
And functional programming seems to say
we have to cut all of those things out.
But the fact of the matter is you
can't cut all of these things out,
because even if you think about
it in a theoretical sense.
Any program that runs is gonna
produce heat by the CPU and that is
the side effect that is an observable
change to the state of the system.
As a matter of fact, not even just the
heat of CPU just the observable delay in
time where one program can't run because
another program is currently running,
that's a side effect.
Not only is it practically impossible
to avoid all side effects,
it's also theoretically
impossible to avoid them.
So when we say avoid side effects,
what we're really saying
is minimize side effects.
Have as few side effects as possible,
knowing full well that you have
to have some side effects.
A program that had no side effects
which can't even exist, but
if it could exist,
a program with no side effects would be
indistinguishable from
the absence of that program.
You couldn't even prove it existed.
You couldn't send anything into it and
see anything come out of it,
so you couldn't even prove that
it existed or that it ran.
So we really wanna change our mindset
from side effects are bad to side effects
take away the benefits of why I'm doing
functional programming in the first place.
They reduce, they water down,
they impurify the benefits
of functional programming.
And that's why if we are going to do side
effects, which we have to sometimes,
we wanna make sure that
they are very obvious.
We wanna make sure that we
are very intentional about them,
rather than simply not caring
about side effects at all.
>> Kyle: So there really is no
such thing as no side effects,
it's just that we want to
avoid them where possible.
And when we have to do them,
make them super obvious.
Why do you think it would be important for
us to make them obvious?
Well, let's think it back to what I
said in the outset of our course.
We said that, code that is written
with functional principles
is based upon mathematics, right?
And just like we don't have to
prove to ourselves 1 + 1 equals 2.
if you have a set of your code that
is written with functional principle
and then you have a bug in your program.
And you could have the bug
in your functional part or
it could be in the parts that don't
abide by functional principles.
Where is it far more
likely that the bug is?
It's in the place where
your side effects are.
I love the way a functional programmer
describes this, they will describe this
idea that we collect all of our
functional programming stuff, all of our
pure functions as they're called and
we'll get into that in a moment.
We collect all of that stuff together and
what we would visualize is a sphere,
it's the core that is functional.
And then we collect all
of the side effects.
All of the non-pure stuff
on the outer shell.
We make a clear delineation
in our program.
I've gone so far, this sounds silly, but
I've gone so far to make a file called
sideeffects.js and
put all my side effects in that one file.
Because if there's a bug,
it is vastly more likely that it's
where my side effects are than not.
It's more likely that I got one
plus one equals two correct.
And then I mess something
else up with not now.
I got an algorithm wrong or
I used the side effect wrong,
something mutated in
a way I wasn't expecting.
That's where bugs more likely come.